banning street coronavirus daily
briefing I'm joined today by Professor
Jonathan van Tam the deputy chief
medical officer and by John Newton our
coordinator for testing today I want to
update you with the latest plans for our
program of test track and trace how
we're going to use this massive testing
capability that we've built in order to
get our down and keep our down before I
do that I just want to remind you of
what we're trying to achieve our plan is
to slow the spread and to protect the
NHS so that the NHS is always there for
you and your family whenever you need it
whether for coronavirus or anything else
that goal is working the number of spare
critical care beds in the NHS is 3413 on
the latest figures there have been 1
million 291,000 tests for coronavirus
including 85,000 186 tests on Sunday
yesterday a hundred and ninety thousand
584 people have now tested positive for
coronavirus an increase of three
thousand nine hundred and eighty-five
thirteen thousand two hundred and fifty
eight people are in hospital with
coronavirus and twenty eight thousand
seven hundred and thirty-four people
have died that's across all settings an
increase of 288 that figure is lower
than at any point since the end of March
but as with testing these reported
figures tend to be lower over the
weekend so we do do expect that number
to rise and remember this is not just a
number but it is a constant insistent
reminder that we must go further and
faster in our national effort in dealing
with this virus over the last month
we've built a national
testing infrastructure capable of over a
hundred thousand tests a day today the
capacity stands at a hundred and eight
thousand this means we're now in a
position to start implementing the next
part of our plan track and trace the aim
of test track and trace is to hunt down
and isolate the virus so it's unable to
reproduce and crucially test track and
trace allows us to take a more targeted
approach to lock down while still safely
containing the disease creating this
system is a huge national undertaking of
unprecedented scale and complexity we've
already taken Britain's small but
brilliant Diagnostics industry and taken
it to global scale we're building an
army of human contact tracers who can
man the phone's and find the contacts
and support people and of course we're
developing the contact tracing app which
can help us deliver test track and trace
on the mass scale that we need across
the country the app which takes full
consideration of privacy and security
has already been tested in closed
conditions at an RAF base and today I
can announce the next steps from
tomorrow we will begin to pilot test
track and trace on the Isle of Wight
starting with health professionals and
rolling out this week to all citizens
I'm grateful to the huge enthusiasm
shown by Islanders who who know that by
participating in this pilot they're at
the forefront of helping get brittle to
download the app and from Thursday each
one of the 80,000 households on the
island will get a letter from the chief
nurse with comprehensive information
about the trial Islanders will then be
asked to install the app once you've
installed the app it'll start logging
the distance between your phone and
other phones with an app nearby it's
been designed with a form of Bluetooth
that conserves power so the app won't
drain your battery and this log of
proximity information
will then be securely stored on your
phone if you become unwell with covert
symptoms you inform the NHS via the app
other app users who you've had
significant contact with in the last few
days will then be sent an alert by the
NHS along with advice about what to do a
test ordering function will then be
built-in if you're watching this and you
live on the Isle of Wight I have a
simple message please download the app
to protect the NHS and save lives by
downloading the app you're protecting
your own health you're protecting the
health of your loved ones and the health
of your community I know the people of
the Isle of Wight will embrace this with
enthusiasm because by embarking on this
project and by embracing test track and
trace you will be saving lives the pilot
is important so we can help make sure
the app works as well as it possibly can
alongside the contact tracing system and
with your help we'll learn a lot we'll
use it to make things better and we want
to hear from you I want to stress and
this is really important that this trial
does not mean the end of social
distancing on the Isle of Wight or
anywhere else for that matter
we will only change the social
distancing rules once our five tests are
met so I'll end with the instruction
that we all know please stay at home
protect the NHS and save lives or if you
live on the Isle of Wight stay at home
install the app protect the NHS and save
lives I'll now turn to Professor van tan
to take us through the days chance Thank
You secretary stage so let's begin again
with refreshing the five tests that we
have in place for deciding if we're
going to adjust the
down the first is around NHS capacity
and we're in a good position on that one
the second one is about a sustained and
consistent fall in daily deaths from
coronavirus and it is now very clear in
the data that we are past the peak the
next one is solid information that the
rate of infection is decreasing to
manageable levels right across the board
this is an indicator that we need to
keep a close eye on over the next few
days and weeks the fourth one is around
operational challenges around testing
and PPE and being able to meet future
demand there are continuing challenges
on PPE it is an absolute priority to
continue pushing on this to get it right
in the long run but of course in on
testing as you've heard from the
secretary of state we're in a very good
position and finally we have to be
confident that the adjustments we
contemplate are not going to risk a
second peak of infections and this is
really a matter of deep scientific
discussion very very close following an
absorbing of the evidence and one that
we're keeping under detailed scientific
review as the days and weeks go by next
slide please
now this slide actually shows search
data of people looking at Apple maps for
direct driving over walking routes or
over using public transport and it tells
the same story as slides you have seen
before about how since we announced
these social distancing measures the
public continued to observe the
instructions to work with us to work to
protect the NHS and get case numbers
down and you can see very very concern
distant trends over-reduced searches for
driving instructions walking
instructions and use of public transport
so we need to keep going let's keep
going and continue to drop the curve
further next slide please
these are this is a graph showing from
the 6th of April through to the 4th of
daily tests completed for coronavirus
and you can see on the right hand side
the latest data showing 85,000 tests
completed on the 4th of May our capacity
is 108 thousand tests and there is
another lab opening next week so this is
all very encouraging tests are going up
people are using testing services more
and we are well within our capacity
capability next slide please
now this slide shows new cases of corona
virus in the UK from the 21st of March
you can see that obvious peak up to a
high level in early April and then you
can see the pattern that has occurred in
terms of new cases right up until the
4th of May on this one I have to say
that new cases need to come down further
we have to continue to track this index
and we have to get cases lower if you
look to the next slide please
here we array the number of people in
hospital with kovat 19 from 17th of
March through to the 3rd of May and
after peaks in the middle of April you
can see that in almost all areas now
there are steady but absolutely
consistent declines occurring possibly
in a small number of areas the trend is
somewhat flat
but overall there are now steady
declines in the number of people in
hospital this is good news
following on please the next slide
critical care beds ICU beds here again
across all four nations you can see
largely continuing declines and possibly
a more important point if you look at
the axis on the left of the slide the
y-axis you can see where we are in terms
of capacity and there is plenty of ICU
capacity which is extremely good I turn
now to deaths in all settings and here
you can see that there is a slow but
consistent decline you will see the
weekend effect very clearly especially
if you look at the three steps on the
right-hand side of the chart fewer
deaths are actually recorded reported at
the weekends that's an artifact of the
way people report deaths but overall if
you look at the orange line the
seven-day and smoothed out rolling
average there is this slow but
consistent decline which is absolutely
going in the right direction now and
then the final slide is one we have
shown for some time showing a comparison
across countries dating back to the day
when 50/50 cumulative deaths were
recorded in each of the countries and
we're now quite a way across the slide
to 60 old days in some of the countries
the message is the same as I've said to
you before that there are kind of three
broad trends on this curve but I do want
to emphasize to you these are numbers
they are not rates they do not adjust
for the size of the underlying
population and this is a difficulty in
interpreting these data we will in the
course of time be able to get all caused
age-adjusted excess mortality for many
of the countries on this slide
and that will give us a much clearer
understanding of what is going on and
hopefully those data will continue for a
long period of time
so that we can understand the fullness
of the picture as we try to beat this
virus I will stop there with the data
and hand back to the Secretary of State
thank you very much Jonathan and we're
now going to take questions and the
first question it's from a member of the
public we have a video from sac lane
from London what is being done to ensure
that be AME key workers are not
disproportionately affected by Co vid 19
and what steps are being taken to
provide support to the families of those
victims who have sadly passed away Thank
You Sakhalin an incredibly important
question two impaired incredibly
important questions both of which we're
working hard to address and I'm going to
ask Jonathan to set out the details but
what I'd say absolutely from the start
is that we recognize that there has been
a disproportionately high number of
people from black and ethnic minority
backgrounds who have passed away
especially amongst the care workers and
those in the NHS and I I pay tribute to
them before and I will do so again
because the NHS is an amazing
organization that has been built on the
dedication of people from all
backgrounds and it's including many many
who've come to this country to to give
their lives working in the NHS and
disproportionately employs people from
ethnic minority backgrounds and and yet
we have seen this impact in the data and
I think it's affected a lot of us
working on it to see the hat and so
we've got a lot of work going in to
fully understand scientifically and make
sure that in every single case we learn
what we can to protect people better
in terms of support for the families of
those who've passed away for those
working in the NHS we have a we now have
a program of support that we've been
able to put in place that is there for
everybody who has a is from a family
where where somebody has died while
since ervis and including across
pharmacy across social can that's so
that I think that's a really important
thing for us to do to recognize the the
sacrifice of those who put themselves at
risk by going to work in this in what
can be dangerous conditions where they
might be working with those who have
covered 19 Jonathan yes I'm extremely
sorry whenever I hear of a healthcare
worker death due to coronavirus whether
it's someone from a black and minority
ethnic group or otherwise it doesn't
change the fact that it takes courage to
work in the NHS at a time like this and
it's most difficult on the subject of
the signal that we have so far on black
and minority ethnic groups I want to say
to you that we are taking it incredibly
seriously there is a very big piece of
scientific work now ongoing that will
report to the chief medical officer and
we'll get to the bottom of this however
long it takes us but I will also say
that this is a complicated picture
because when you start to study patterns
of disease across different ethnic
groups you also have to take into
account potential differences in the age
structure between groups also
differences in the patterns of
underlying medical conditions which we
know do vary by ethnic group and
therefore it's a complicated picture and
also deprivation has to be taken into
account where people live
and all of this is complex it takes time
and I'm not going to rush that answer I
think we owe it to minority ethnic
groups to get this right and get a clear
signal for you and you'll have worked
out I'm from an ethnic minority group
and we will get to the bottom of this it
could be that Professor Newton has some
further epidemiological granularity he'd
like to add on this point Thank You
Johnson well just to say that we are as
you say looking at the data very
carefully not just on ethnicity but also
on age sex and other factors such as
obesity which we know do have an impact
on the effect of coronavirus and but
it's already clear from some of the
published data that the impacted in PME
groups is greater that there are more
people with the infection and those who
have the infection have have worse
outcomes in many cases so there is
already cause for concern but as Johnson
says we're not entirely entirely clear
how much of that is due to different
levels of underlying conditions or other
risk factors so there is work to be done
and we will be publishing this as soon
as it's ready thank you very much thank
you cycling the next questions from
Conrad from Ashford and Conrad asks
going forward will the primary aim of
test track and trace be to squash the
occurrence of covered 19 infection to
very low levels or simply to flatten the
curve enough that the NHS is not
overwhelmed and that is a really
important question Conrad the answer is
that test track and trace will help us
to get the r down and to get the number
of new cases down and to keep it down
but not on its own it's primarily the
social distancing measures that we've
taken so far that have flattened the
curve and now the we can see that the
curve is going down from the
presentation that Professor van Town
just gave the goal is to keep the number
of new infections going down and bring
in the test track and trace or at a
point which we will do
well tomorrow from tomorrow in the Isle
of Wight and then rolling out to the
rest of the country will will that we
will get those numbers down the test
tracking trace becomes more effective
the lower the number and then we want to
keep the number going down by keeping
the are below one the rate of infection
so it is not our goal is not simply to
flatten the curve it is to get the
occurrence of covered 19 infections to
very low levels to be absolutely clear
within your question that that is the
answer thanks very much and we'll now
take questions from the media q pin from
the BBC thank you very much
when will you have recruited your 18,000
contact tracers and when will the full
test track and trace network be up and
running the aim is to have the whole
thing up and running in the by the
middle of this month if we're starting
already we've already started the
recruitment we have of the 18,000 we
have thousands already recruited and we
are making very rapid progress not only
in the recruitment but also the the
training that's necessary a short piece
of training and we have enough to get
going on the Isle of Wight in fact they
came on stream as of 5 o'clock this
evening so there that's up and running
now and then to roll out across the
country but there's no there's no magic
around the 18,000 figure that is the
initial scale that we think is necessary
if it needs to be bigger when we find
out from the ons survey that's in the
field at the moment what the prevalence
of the disease is the number of new
cases per day actually out there rather
than that that we find through positive
tests then we will then we'll adjust
that figure that's the initial goal but
it'll be up and running by the middle of
the month of course on business some
businesses will be required to have PPE
for their staff where will they procure
it and will
in competition with the NHS well this is
a really important question when we
consider changes to the social
distancing that measures the wider
impact of changes to social distancing
measures including for instance on PPE
and the first call on PPE must go to the
NHS and Social Care and those other
essential services who need it to keep
the people delivering those services
safe and so that is something that we
take into account it's in our five tests
but it is something that we're working
very hard on now of course it's our job
in running the health and social care
system to ensure that those areas and
the other public services have PPE but
and there's a worldwide shortage and as
you say so we do need to take that into
consideration before making before
making changes and that's why it's one
of the five tests thanks very much
Tom Clark from ITV Thank You Secretary
of State's um the most successful
contact tracing efforts around the world
like those of you now South Korea
Singapore were only partly reliant on
mobile phone technology in order to work
they were more reliant on large numbers
of volunteers on a community level going
out to track down and trace cases at
huge scale has the government insured
this capacity is in place in the UK or
are we putting too much faith in call
centres and in untasted it's a really
important point and I agree with the
with the point in the question which is
that it isn't just about the technology
and the people in call centres it's also
about citizens acting in the right way
acting in the right way to download the
app because that protects you and
protects your family and protects the
NHS but also acting in the right way to
do contact tracing yourself John really
good it's a really good point well made
the app is
very exciting and the app adds something
extra that's something automated
response that can be almost immediate
but as you say the program that we're
putting in place is an integrated
program with the app but also with
contact tracing driven by testing so
access to testing partly through the app
but also other routes to a test and then
the test result backed up by contact
tracing driven by public health
professionals at one level we've got
public health England but also a lot of
experience on the ground with directors
of Public Health and local authorities
environmental health officers who are
very expert in this exactly as you say
shoe-leather epidemiology out on the
streets
finding contacts and but even actually
what people call traditional contact
tracing isn't very traditional anymore
it's quite also it's quite highly
technical so we've developed a web-based
support the contact tracing and advisory
service which has been ramped up to
support this and there's also another
line of defense through the telephone
call centre so it's a multi-layered
approach and one of the points of the
Isle of Wight test pilot is to try and
see how those different elements
integrate together to support each other
so it's a very good point we are
learning from the best practice around
the world but we also have something to
offer in the UK as well because we've
been doing this for a long time thanks
Tom I hope that answers your question
yes may have a quick follow up question
are we are we caught in something of a
catch-22 with contact tracing that as I
understand it the numbers of cases have
to fall quite a bit more before we can
reliably roll it out across the country
but if we keep lockdown measures in
place which we have to until your fifth
test is met it's quite hard to pilot
contact tracing because most of us are
trying to isolate ourselves as much as
possible and so no it's the short answer
the and a lot of slightly longer answer
is that even with social moat as social
distancing measures there still are some
new cases and the and that means that
the that the technology can still be
effective and even with the scale of
of of new cases across the country
contact tracing can still have an impact
and the app will still be highly
effective it's just more effective the
fewer the number of new cases so these
are all matters of degree rather than
absolute so we're not caught in a in a
in a catch-22 but it is absolutely true
that the social distancing measures are
the thing that in doing they're having
the big impact and so the hence the you
know the message remains stay at home to
protect the NHS and save lives unless
you're in the Isle of Wight but in your
even in the Isle of Wight you should
still stay at home to protect the NHS
and save lives it's that you should also
install the app because that will help
this to be yet more effective one final
point on this which is the Isle of Wight
has a slightly lower rate of covert new
covert infections than some other places
in the country and therefore actually is
a that makes it a good place to test
this not only is it good because it will
help the Isle of Wight but it is also
good because it has that slightly lower
number of new infections lockdown
measures until contact tracing is up and
running across the country no the two
aren't aren't necessarily linked like
that we haven't said that you we can't
make changes before it's up and running
it's just that the test track and trace
system will help us to get our down and
hold our down and the lower the number
of new cases the more effective it will
be but we haven't made a concrete link
that your question drew between the
number between the having this system of
in place nationally and making changes
to the social distancing measures we
there isn't a necessary link between the
two they're just they do work in tandem
the next question is from Oliver Dyer
from Isle of Wight radio even in all in
a poll that's Isle of Wight radio
today 80% of our listeners that they
would install this new app but the
island has a higher than average elderly
population who fall into the governments
of vulnerable category
how are you expecting those who don't
have a smartphone or can't use that
technology bids on the island or across
the country to get behind this and with
that in mind considering the islands has
an elderly population one of the
questions our listeners want to know is
why the islands been chosen over other
over as Auk Islands or locations so look
that's a great set of questions Oliver
and I'm really really pleased to hear
that 80% of people said that they would
download the app and because the more
people who download the app the more
effective it's going to be because it's
a you need you need two people having
downloaded the app for it to be affected
for one to be able to tell the other
that they've been in close contact with
somebody who's got symptoms of kovat 19
and so I'm really pleased that the
people of the Isle of Wight have
responded today in this way I had a
feeling that they would and I'm really
glad that they have and but partly
because of the challenges that you set
out that not everybody has a smartphone
that that's that's another reason
actually to test it in the Isle of Wight
because if we tested it somewhere where
it would be easy we wouldn't find as
many of the challenges rather than
testing it somewhere where you've got to
do that you've got to have the
technology but you've got to have the
human contact tracing as well they go
they go hand in hand they help each
other and so that's that is actually one
of the things we thought about before
choosing the Isle of Wight as the as the
place to go first
John do you yeah thank you I mean I
think the other white is an ideal place
to do this it's quite a large population
and there is a benefit in the fact that
travel on and off the island is
relatively restricted the ferries are
there but they're running relatively
infrequently so it is an ideal place to
look at the epidemiology and see the
impact it's also I used to be the
Regional Director of Public Health for
South Central including the Isle of
Wight I know that the island the island
is is very well equipped to respond
things that is a very coherent group
we've had tremendous support from the
local authority from the NHS from the
local MP and like everybody else I think
it's going to be a great success as a as
a pilot and your point about elderly
people I think we shouldn't first you
shouldn't make assumptions I mean quite
a lot of elderly people are extremely
tech savvy and quite happy to use
smartphones but we've also recognized
that there are other ways of doing
contact tracing so as I mentioned we've
built in a number of routes so people
don't have to have the app in order to
benefit but of course we will all
benefit if the app and the contact
tracing drives down the infection rate
it drives down the infection rate for
everybody and I think the third point to
say is that the people who are most
mobile and most likely to be out bumping
into each other are also the people who
are probably most likely to be using
smartphones so I think all in all we
think it's a strong program and we're
looking forward to seeing how it works
in your Alawite and that that survey is
extremely encouraging so thank you does
that answer your question
it does yeah I'm gonna add one more
follow-up go ahead
fantastic so obviously whilst a lot of
people will love I love our radio
listeners in particular I have been
positive about the app there are some
concerns that the lockdown measures
could be lifted here early to form part
of that trial could lock down on the
eyelid weight being lifted earlier than
the rest of the UK and if so is it safe
to do so well I want to thank I love
white radio listeners for how much
they've engaged with this this this idea
today and I can reassure you that there
aren't any changes to social distancing
measures that are proposed as part of
this pilot the pilot is to find out how
the app works how the interaction of
people then becomes recognised by the
technology and the the link from that to
the human contact tracing and to the
testing regime because there's a new
testing center on the Isle of Wight as
well and so there aren't changes our
proposals are that changes to be to the
social distancing will only take place
when the five tests are met and that's
national
rather than the Isle of Wight having
having any differences in that part to
the rest of the country thanks very much
indeed Oliver Joe Murphy from the
Evening Standard good afternoon
um can I ask um the scientists
how has your understanding of immunity
developed over the last month or so do
you know yet whether people will catch
it again and how are the tests
developing how the testing of the tests
going do you see antibodies and immunity
playing a really significant role in
easing out of lockdown or not and
secretary if I could just ask a follow
to Conrad's question and who asked how
low the numbers we go you said very low
can you put a figure on that the answer
to the second question is no and the
answer to the first question is and I'll
say a little and then I ask both
scientists to come in John on the
testing and jvt on the science of
immunity what I'd say is that antibody
testing is incredibly important we have
antibody tests in the field at the
moment they're being used for surveys
they are lab based rather than the
rather than the automatic response tests
that we looked into in great detail a
month or so ago but then none of them
were effective enough to be used for
clinical reasons but they can still be
used for surveys so we have surveys in
the field both with the the stick tests
and also with lab based serology which
detects antibodies so we will be getting
estimates soon of the proportion of the
population who have the antibodies and
the test tests for whether the
antibodies are there the effect of the
antibodies on your risk to catching or
transmitting corona virus in the future
is is the is the next important step in
that and the science on that has been
rapidly developing
and ask jvt to update on that yes thank
you for the question so on antibodies
one of the things we want to know is
when you've had in Kovac 19 infection do
you get antibodies do they protect you
against further instances of the same
illness and how long are they going to
protect you for so that's kind of three
questions really
so let's chop this up into three answers
and the first answer is the first thing
we wanted to know was once you've had
confirmed kovat 19 infection do you get
antibodies and one of the things that
we've been interested in and want to do
is call people back who've had a Ovid 19
for sure and who've recovered to ask
them if they'll begin to take part in a
program we're starting to get plasma
containing antibodies and use it for
treatment in the future in trials to
understand if it's going to work and
save lives and the good news on that is
that that program has started and the
overwhelming majority of people so far
called back who've had definite kovat 19
infection have got antibodies in their
blood stream which is a good news thing
so those antibodies take different times
in different people to develop but by
and large the signal is that people get
antibodies the next question is do those
antibodies protect you from further
infections and we just haven't had this
disease around on the planet in humans
for long enough to know the answers to
that with any surety and that's a piece
of science that we will just have to
follow a bit longer I hope the answer is
yes but I think it's one where we have
to be much clearer before we can take
that responsibility of giving you a very
clear answer
on that and then the final piece is how
long will the antibodies last and we do
know that for other normal coronaviruses
if that's the right word the ones that
are a couple of viruses that together
with many others cause what we'd call
the common cold that those antibodies
don't persist necessarily for years and
years and years now it doesn't follow
that that's going to be the case with
kovat 19 we do not know at this point we
will have to simply follow people who've
recovered and test them repeatedly until
we have an understanding of how long
antibodies last and how long they
protect for but there is an absolutely
massive piece of work now underway
multiple studies to look for antibodies
in different populations in the UK and
indeed to follow some people who've
recovered for long periods of time into
the future at least a couple of years
and we will have much clearer signals
over time but I'm afraid it's just one
of those where we can't make the science
go any faster than how quickly our
bodies go in terms of maintaining the
antibodies and like everybody else in
the world we just have to be patient and
cautious until we get those answers but
I do believe in the long run once we
have those kind of answers potentially
antibody testing will be a very
important part of our future strategy
Thanks in fact so because I was tested
positive and now I have the I have
fairly regularly somebody comes in takes
blood to ensure that to test whether I
have antibodies and then also to test
whether I get it again because we have
surveys in the field right now to test
if people with antibodies then catch the
disease which is an absolutely critical
fact that will then determine policy
over what we say people with antibodies
who've tested
positive on an antibody test can do and
which is at the moment we don't yet have
the science to make those policy
decisions but it'll be absolutely
critical John did you have anything to
add on that's just just briefly on the
testing there's been really very good
progress on the antibody test there are
at least two large commercial
organizations who develop good lab based
antibody tests which we're currently
evaluating but also people looking at
ways in of doing antibody tests close to
the person the patient and there a
number of options there including a
saliva test and all of these options are
looking quite promising and being
evaluated so I think in general we can
say as we did as we thought that there
would be antibody tests available when
we needed them and they will support
also our contact tracing program and
strategy later on fantastic if I follow
up and thank you all three for very
informative answers there so to state
life's full of risks and this is all
about balance of risks you're somebody
who's probably got antibodies would you
feel happy going into a crowded room not
yet not yet I very much hope that the
science shows that the people with
antibodies who tested positive for
having antibodies are have a low risk of
transmitting the disease and a low risk
of catching it both are important
because low risk of catching it to
protect me low risk of transmitting it
to protect others I hope that that's
where the science comes out that is true
of most corona viruses i but we've got
to make sure that we've got the science
because until we know that's the case we
can't be sure of it we can't base a
policy decision on it and I can't be
comfortable doing what you mentioned in
the question because that might simply
trigger a rise in the number of
infections if the science turns out that
to be wrong and there are so many novel
things about this corona virus the there
are so many things that are different to
previous there's the six existing corona
viruses that we do have to test this and
not base our assumption
on how other coronaviruses behave
because you you know I we don't want to
take the risk of assuming this
coronavirus behaves like other
coronaviruses before saying and taking a
policy decision that people with
antibodies are our lower risk but if the
science concludes that they that they
are then we'll take decisions on on that
basis and I would say this this point of
John's that there's been big advances in
antibody testing especially the lab
based antibody testing is very it's very
important today rush the Swiss global
Diagnostics company made a very positive
announcement about progress with their
antibody test and we're in discussions
with them about a very large-scale
rollout of antibody testing as well as
with some others who may be able to
bring this forward but there's been
false hope before in antibody testing
and so I'm will will make announcements
when we're absolutely ready thanks very
much Joe Paul wor from the huffington
post l secretary as you frequently said
the long term solution to this pandemic
is a fully scaled up vaccine for coated
19 yeah but a vaccine relies on as many
people as possible actually taking it up
now you told HuffPost last year and i
quote there's a very strong argument for
having compulsory vaccinations for
children for when they go to school
because otherwise they're putting other
children at risk would that apply to a
covert vaccine as well as to MMR and
other vaccines and what other measures
are you looking at to ensure as many
adults and children take up the new
vaccine when it's available and if I can
to Professor van Tam can I ask you what
you've made of the early academic
research done in Harvard Germany and
even Cambridge that suggests high levels
of air pollution may be one of the most
important contributors to the clustering
of deaths from kovin 19 is saige looking
at that or going to look at that thanks
Paul two very good questions on the
vaccine and the first and most important
thing is that we support the development
of the vaccine and you all have seen the
Prime Minister's excellent announcement
today and then that we also ensure do
the work to ensure that people can get
access to the vaccines starting with
those who are most vulnerable and the on
the question of whether to make it
compulsory I think that the extent of
the public's reaction to following the
lockdown shows that we will be able to
achieve very very high levels of
vaccination without taking that step and
and so you know our task is to ensure
that it is in the first instance that we
support the science as much as possible
because we can't assume they'll be a
vaccine
there is no coronavirus vaccine yet and
for any of the existing coronaviruses
and this is uncertain science but whilst
I don't rule anything out I we're
presuming we're proceeding on the basis
that just such a huge proportion of the
population are going to take this up
because of the obvious benefits to
individuals and their families and their
communities and indeed the whole nation
that there'll be an enormous demand for
it as and when the science is safe to
proceed Thank You secretary
so just to stay on the vaccine question
for a little longer and we are following
the developments in vaccine research
across the world including in the UK we
remain very hopeful that there will be a
breakthrough at some point in the future
I think what I can say to you is that it
is more likely than not that the first
vaccines will be licensed in adults in
the first instance and therefore one has
to take put some caveats around your
question around children and the other
thing to say is that so far the
epidemiological evidence is not showing
us that there is a massive burden of
disease or burden of mortality and
children it is actually completely at
the other end of the scale it is in the
elderly and so from that perspective
again that's another cavy
I'd add to your question about
vaccinating children on the second
question about air pollution and thank
you for that I think we already have a
very solid data that air pollution
contributes to a whole range of
mortality particularly from respiratory
illnesses and respiratory diseases and
cardiovascular disease I have heard it
said about air pollution and Cove in
nineteen I have not personally studied
those data and looked at that question
in detail but what you say is entirely
plausible in my view and professor
Newton may have some further
observations on air pollution well
they're only your general point that we
know that air pollution because it's so
pervasive and affects so many people has
a huge burden but like Jonathan I
haven't looked at those papers but but I
think there's something that we will get
back to you
yeah just one brief follow-up Secretary
of State you have a message for those
anti-vaxxers here and abroad when we
when and if we do get a vaccine for Cove
in nineteen I think there has been no
greater demonstration in modern history
that vaccines save lives than the need
for a vaccine to save lives and to get
the world going again following the
outbreak of kovat nineteen and we will
only license a vaccine when it is both
effective and safe and when the
independent regulators if and when the
independent regulators license a vaccine
in this country they will do so knowing
that it will that it is safe and
everybody should follow that everybody
should follow that advice thanks very
much so finally we're going to go to
Louise Hill from the Isle of Wight
County press Thank You mr. secretary and
as local democracy reporter on the Isle
of Wight I have seen a mixed reaction to
the app but
concern that keeps occurring is whether
you can assure Island residents who are
weary of using the app when this
technology that their data will be kept
fully protected and private throughout
this trial and going forward and the
government will be fully transparent
with Islanders about the way this app
works yes absolutely this is an
incredibly important question I was very
glad to hear from Oliver from Isle of
Wight radio that on his initial survey
there was a very high degree of support
for the for the app and for downloading
it but it has been the app has been
designed with privacy and security front
of mind it's been signed off by the
National Cyber Security Center who've
been involved in its development and I
want to thank them and pay tribute to
the work that they've done in ensuring
that the privacy and cybersecurity is
strong the data is stored on an
individual's phone not by the by the NHS
until somebody finds that they've got
symptoms and then they need a test and
so they need to connect to the NHS and
then you need to the NHS needs to
contact those who you've been in contact
with and so the the this has this has
the highest level of privacy built in to
make sure that we can both reassure
people in terms of privacy but also that
it can be effective and save lives I
don't know if you've got anything
exactly right so just to be absolutely
clear the app itself doesn't hold any
personal information it just has
information about the phone where it was
which other phones it's been in contact
with but only using anonymized randomly
generated numbers and those are the data
that are collected so no personal
information is generally that is
contained by the app or generated by the
app the circus-like the only personal
information used is when somebody
approaches the NHS to have a test or to
have their contact right so it is a it's
a very safe use of data and people
really should feel very reassured by all
the proportions that have been taken
thanks very much in
thank you from the island have you got
to follow up you've got it so as you
said earlier we're told to look down
won't be eased on the island as part of
the roller rollout of this app does that
that means people already either at home
or making very limited trips and as the
app is predominantly aimed at the island
skis workers will that guarantee enough
useful data for the app going forward
this is a really important question that
we thought about when selecting where to
to trial it because there's a busy
hospital on the island and there's other
and key workers including those who work
for the council for instance and in the
other services and the right across the
board there are there are interactions
and there are new cases on the island
and so we think that that it will be
effective and it will be an effective
place to pilot but also we think that
the that the test track and trace system
as a whole will be more effective when
there are fewer new cases because then
when you do find a new case we can
really support that person find out who
they've been in contact with and then
contact all of those people and it's
quite a metallo of effort and support in
to then trying to stop that case from
spreading any further so actually the
the the test track and trade system as a
whole will be more effective when
there's fewer cases and currently there
are fewer cases on the island than there
are in the rest of the country thank you
very much indeed thanks to for all the
questions from the public from the
national media from the Isle of Wight
and and I'm very grateful for this
opportunity to have set out these
details of our test track a test track
and trace program and look forward to
seeing you again here from here in
Downing Street very soon thanks very
much